
 
Large Scale Microblog Mining Using Distributed MB-LDA 
 

Chenyi Zhang 
College of Computer Science 

Zhejiang University 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 310027 

P.R.China 

zhangchenyi.zju@gmail.com 

 
Jianling Sun 

College of Computer Science  
Zhejiang University 

Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 310027  
P.R.China 

sunjl@zju.edu.cn 

 
ABSTRACT 
In the information explosion era, large scale data processing and 

mining is a hot issue. As microblog grows more popular, 

microblog services have become information provider on a web 

scale, so researches on microblog begin to focus more on its 

content mining than solely user’s relationship analysis before. 
Although traditional text mining methods have been studied well, 

no algorithm is designed specially for microblog data, which 

contain structured information on social network besides plain 

text. In this paper, we introduce a novel probabilistic generative 

model MicroBlog-Latent Dirichlet Allocation (MB-LDA), which 

takes both contactor relevance relation and document relevance 

relation into consideration to improve topic mining in microblogs. 

Through Gibbs sampling for approximate inference of our model, 

MB-LDA can discover not only the topics of microblogs, but also 

the topics focused by contactors. When faced with large datasets, 

traditional techniques on single node become less practical within 

limited resources. So we present distributed MB-LDA in 

MapReduce framework in order to process large scale microblogs 

with high scalability. Furthermore, we apply a performance model 

to optimize the execution time by tuning the number of mappers 

and reducers. Experimental results on actual dataset show MB-

LDA outperforms the baseline of LDA and distributed MB-LDA 

offers an effective solution to topic mining for large scale 

microblogs.  

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
H.2.8 [Database Management]: Database Applications;  

I.2.11 [Artificial Intelligence]: Distributed Artificial Intelligence 

General Terms 
Algorithms, Performance, Experimentation 

Keywords 
Distributed MB-LDA, Large-scale, Microblogs, Social network, 

MapReduce 

1. INTRODUCTION 
Microblog has become a popular social networking service in 

the recent years because of its ease of use and convenience. Based 

on user's social relationship, microblog services offer a real-time 

platform to update personal status and share interesting things 

with friends on their buddy lists. Microbloggers can publish their 

microblogs over multiple delivery channels, e.g., via web 

interface, cell phone or other user applications. Famous microblog 

service Twitter, as an information provider on a web scale, has 

reached a new milestone: Twitter users are now sending over 200 

million tweets per day, which is huge in data volume.  

Microblogs can be divided into three categories[1]: Broadcast, 

conversation, or retweet messages. Broadcast messages are most 

common and can be seen by any users; conversation messages, 

starting with a special symbol "@", have specific contactors to 

talk to; retweet messages, identified by a special symbol "RT", 

allow users to forward other's messages with their personal 

comments.  

In the information explosion era, how to effectively dig out 

latent topics and internal semantic structures from large scale data 

is an important issue. Microblogs contain structured information 

on social network besides plain text, and the relationships on 

social network can play a supporting role in topic mining. On the 

other hand, microblogs are short text carried with limited 

information (restricted to 140 characters), which will increase the 

difficulty of topic mining. These natural features of microblogs 

mentioned above prevent traditional text mining algorithms to be 

employed directly with their full potentials. 

Early work of microblog mainly focused on its user relationship 

and community structure. For example, Java et al. [2] studied the 

topological and geographical properties of Twitter’s social 
network. Others such as Krishnamurthy et al.[3] studied user 

behaviors and geographic growth patterns of Twitter. Only a few 

researches on content analysis of microblog were proposed 

recently[4], that is mainly because traditional text mining 

algorithms, which are suitable for old corpora, cannot model 

microblog data very well without considering its inner structured 

information on social network. In this paper, we proposed a novel 

probabilistic generative model based on LDA, called MB-LDA, 

which takes both contactor relevance relation and document 

relevance relation into consideration to improve topic mining in 

microblogs. In real world applications, as large amount of 

microblogs are increasing day by day, traditional techniques on 

single node become less practical within limited resources. So we 

present distributed MB-LDA in MapReduce framework[5] in order 

to process large scale microblogs with high scalability. Further 

optimization is carried out to speed up the execution time by 

tuning the number of mappers and reducers. 

 

  

 

 
 

Copyright is held by the International World Wide Web Conference 

Committee (IW3C2). Distribution of these papers is limited to classroom 
use, and personal use by others. 

WWW 2012 Companion, April 16–20, 2012, Lyon, France. 
ACM 978-1-4503-1230-1/12/04. 

 

WWW 2012 – LSNA'12 Workshop April 16–20, 2012, Lyon, France

1035



In this paper, we make the following contributions: 

? A novel model MB-LDA is proposed, which is 
suitable for microblog data by taking both structured 

information (i.e. contactor relation, forwarding 

relation) and unstructured information (i.e. text) into 

consideration.  

? Distributed MB-LDA in MapReduce framework is 
proposed in order to meet the requirement of 

processing large scale microblogs with high 

scalability. 

? Experimental results on actual dataset show MB-
LDA outperforms the baseline of LDA and 

distributed MB-LDA offers an effective solution to 

topic mining for large scale microblogs. 

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 

introduces the previous work related to this paper. Section 3 

introduces the novel model MB-LDA for microblog mining. 

Section 4 proposes the distributed MB-LDA in MapReduce 

framework for large scale situations and applies performance 

model to further optimize our approach. The experiment is 

conducted in Section 5, which is followed by the conclusion of 

our contribution in Section 6. 

2. RELATED WORK 
There exist many algorithms for topic mining for text in 

literature. The clustering methods are early solution to this 

problem, which transfer unstructured text data to vectors by 

Vector Space Model (VSM) and do clustering with traditional 

methods like K-means[6]. Clustering results are usually considered 

sharing the same topic respectively. However, the major 

disadvantage of clustering methods is that many of these 

algorithms depend on distance functions for the pairwise distance 

measurements, which are difficult to define in large scale corpora; 

besides, there lies no semantic information in clustering results, 

which need further analysis to extract topics. 

Dimensionality reduction method like Latent Semantic 

Analysis (LSA) was introduced to text mining by Deerwester et 

al.[7] By assuming that words close in meaning will occur close 

together in text, LSA constructs a term-document matrix in the 

popular tf-idf scheme[8] and use singular value decomposition to 

capture its latent semantic in the concept space[9]. Although LSA 

can extract topics from corpora and find relations between terms 

in a semantic way, the limitation is that the result of SVD is less 

interpretable and LSA itself cannot capture polysemy. LSA is not 

suitable to large scale text mining due to its high computing cost. 

Probabilistic topic models such as Latent Dirichlet Allocation 

(LDA) was introduced to text modeling by Blei et al.[10] LDA is 

also a method to recover the latent topic structure, which extends 

PLSA[11] by defining a complete probabilistic generative model. 

The intuition behind LDA is that documents exhibit multiple 

topics which are represented by distributions over words. In the 

framework of LDA, words of documents are the observed 

variables while topic structures are the hidden variables. Through 

probabilistic inference for LDA, the hidden variables are inferred 

and topics can be discovered from the corpus[12]. 

Topic model is widely applied to topic mining[10], information 

retrieval[13], text classification[14] and social network analysis[15]. 

Ideas associated to topic model are also adapted to non-text 

domains[16] such as image and music. There are also some 

extension models considering relationship between documents, 

for example, Link-PLSA-LDA and Hypertext Topic Model 

(HTM), which are relevant to our work: Link-PLSA-LDA was 

introduced for citation analysis by Nallapati et al[17], assuming that 

cited document is generated by PLSA, citing document is 

generated by LDA and two documents share the same topic; HTM 

was proposed to process hypertexts by Congkai Sun et al[18], 

which takes hyperlinks into consideration and outperforms the 

baseline methods on topic mining and text classification. 

In recent years, with the rapid increase in the amount of 

published information and the effects of this abundance of data, 

parallel machine learning methods were developed to satisfy the 

requirement of large scale text processing, especially after the 

MapReduce[5] technology was introduced by Google to support 

distributed computing on large data sets on clusters of computers 

with high scalability. Relevant parallel methods for LDA include 

the following: Newman et al.[19] proposed Approximate 

Distributed LDA (AD-LDA), where topic-document matrix is 

stored locally, each processor performs a local Gibbs sampling 

step, followed by a step of synchronized global update for topic-

word matrix. Asuncion et al.[20] proposed asynchronous 

distributed LDA, where the update step changes to an 

asynchronous communication with another random processor. 

Wang et al.[21] proposed an MPI implementation of AD-LDA, 

which can be applied to real world applications such as 

communication recommendation systems. Smola et al.[22] 

proposed a high performance sampling architecture for inference 

of latent topic models on a cluster of workstations. 

              Hyperparameters for     and    

          Hyperparameters for    

T         Number of topics 

D          Number of microblogs 

V         Number of words 

c         Contactors in conversation messages(@) 

          Weight hyperparameters for retweet messages 

           Topic distribution associated with contactor c 

           Topic distribution over microblog d 

             Topic distribution over retweet message d 

          Word distribution over topics 

zi   z-i                    Topic of word i (indicators before sampling i) 

w        Words in microblogs 

             Number of times topic j is assigned to d 

             Number of times all topics are assigned to d 

             Number of times topic j is focused by c 

             Number of times all topics are focused by c 

             Number of times word v is assigned to topic j 

             Number of times all words are assigned to topic j 

           Decision whether is a conversation message 

r         Decision whether is a retweet message 

Fig. 1 Notation 

WWW 2012 – LSNA'12 Workshop April 16–20, 2012, Lyon, France

1036



3. MicroBlog Latent Dirichlet Allocation 
3.1 Modeling 

Different from plain text, microblog has its special symbols (i.e. 

@ and RT) to characterize the relation between microblogs: @ 

indicates the contactor relevance relation of microblogs and RT 

indicates the document relevance relation of microblogs, which 

are defined as follows. 

Definition 1. Contactor relevance relation of microblogs refers 

to that conversation message and its contactor (@) have latent 

semantic relationships. In general, messages with the same 

contactor usually share the related topics. This phenomenon is 

very common in conversation microblogs. For example, two 

conversation messages: “@Ethan Can you lend me a book on data 
mining” and “@Ethan HELP me on these computer exercises”, if 
considering the contactor relevance relation, we can set a 

connection on these two seemingly unrelated microblogs and infer 

that “computer exercises” in the latter message are related to data 
mining. 

Definition 2. Document relevance relation of microblogs refers 

to that comment on retweet message and its original content have 

latent semantic relationships. In general, the comment part and 

original part share the related topics. This phenomenon is very 

common in retweet microblogs. For example, one retweet 

message: “Good job RT @Ethan I have finished this experiment”, 
we can hardly dig out topics from the simple comment “Good 
job”. But by considering the document relevance relation, we can 
infer that “Good job” is an experiment work. 

MB-LDA is a unified model for topic mining of microblogs 

based on LDA, by overall considering contactor relevance relation 

and document relevance relation. MB-LDA adopts the basic idea 

of topic model, namely each microblog exhibits multiple topics 

which are represented by probability distributions over words, 

denoted as        and       respectively. The Bayesian 
network of MB-LDA is showed in Fig. 2. 

?d z w?d ? 

?

T

c?c?c

D

C

r?

 Fig. 2 Bayesian network of MB-LDA 

MB-LDA generates microblogs in the following process: 

1. Random choose a topic distribution over words. The 
distribution   is sampled from a Dirichlet distribution with 
hyperparameter  . 

2. Judge whether is a conversation microblog according to the 
symbol “@”. If so, mark    as 1, random choose a 
contactor-topic distribution  , which is sampled from a 
Dirichlet distribution with hyperparameter   , then assign 
the value of    to   ; if not, random choose a document-
topic distribution   , which is sampled from a Dirichlet 
distribution with hyperparameter  . 

The probability distribution of   is showed as follows: 

1
( | ) ( | , ) ( | ) ( | )c cc c d dP P c P P

? ?? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?? ?
  (1) 

3. Judge whether is a retweet microblog according to the 
symbol “RT”. If so, the distribution of forwarding part dRT 
over topics is     , sample r from a Bernoulli distribution 

with parameter   to decide from which Multinomial 
distribution (with parameter     or   ) to draw the topic 
assignment zdn of current word; if not, set r as 0, 

straightforward draw the topic assignment zdn of current 

word from the Multinomial distribution with parameter   . 

4. Draw the specific word wdn from the Multinomial 

distribution with parameter     . 

For a microblog, the joint probability distribution over all 

words and their topics is showed as follows: 

1

( , | , , ) ( | ) ( | ) ( | , )

( | ) ( | ) ( | ) ( | , )
RT

r r

d d

P P r P P

P r P P P

? ? ? ? ? ?
? ? ? ??

?

?

w z z w z

z z w z

  (2) 

Formal description of generative process in MB-LDA is as 

follows: 

for each topic 
{1,2... }k T?

 do 

 draw 
~ ( )k Dir? ?

 

end for 

for each microblog d do 

use “@” to choose a contact 

if starts with “@”  

 draw 
~ ( )d c cDir? ? ??

 

else 

 draw 
~ ( )d dDir? ?

 

for each word wdn do 

 use “RT” to judge a relation 

 if has “RT” 

       draw 
( )r Ber ??

 

         if r=1 

  draw 
~ ( )

RTdn d
z Multi ?

 

         else 

  
~ ( )dn dz Multi ?

 

 else  

         draw 
~ ( )dn dz Multi ?

 

 draw 
~ ( )

dndn z
w Multi ?

 

end for 

end for 

Fig. 3 Generative process of microblogs 

WWW 2012 – LSNA'12 Workshop April 16–20, 2012, Lyon, France

1037



3.2 Inference 
As showed in Fig. 2, the words in microblogs, contactor 

relation and retweet relation are observed while the topic structure 

(i.e. the topics, document-topic distribution, etc.) is hidden 

structure. The central problem for topic models is to infer the 

hidden variables using the observed ones (computing the posterior 

distribution of the hidden variables given the observed variables), 

which can be thought of as “reversing” the generative process.   

Inference methods for topic models include variational 

Bayesian[10], Gibbs sampling[23], expectation propagation[24]. 

Among them, Gibbs sampling, a special case of Markov chain 

Monte Carlo, is a fast and effective algorithms for approximate 

inference in high-dimensional models. In this paper, we adopt 

Gibbs sampling to infer the hidden structure of MB-LDA. 

The inference process of MB-LDA is as follows: 

1. Expand Equation (1) and (2) by Euler integration: 

,

1 ,

( )( )
( | , )

( ) ( )

T
T

v j v

jv j

nV
P

n V

??? ? ?? ?
? ? ?? ??

? ? ?
? ? ? ?? ?

?w z
    (3) 

,

1 ,

( )( )
( | )

( ) ( )

T
D

j d j

dj d

nT
P

n T

??? ? ?? ?
? ? ? ? ??

? ? ?? ?? ? ? ?? ?
?z

     (4) 

2. Sample posterior distribution using Gibbs sampling: 

, ,

, ,

,

,

,

( , | , )
( | , , , )

( , | , )

1 1

1 1

1
( 1)

1

i i

i

j v d j

j d

j v

d j

j

P
P z j

P

n n

n V n T

n
n

n V

? ?
? ?

? ?

? ?

? ?

?
?

?

?

?

? ?

?

? ?

? ? ? ?
? ?

? ? ? ?

? ?
? ? ? ?

? ?

z w
w z

z w

  (5) 

3. Iterate Equation (5) for all topics until it reaches the 
convergence for the entire microblog set.  

The final results of    and    are listed as follows: 

,

,

1

1

d j

d

d

n

n T

?
?

??

? ?
?

? ?                                   (6) 

,

,

1

1

j v

z

j

n

n V

?
?

??

? ?
?

? ?                                   (7) 

Similarly, the final result of contactor-topics distribution    is 
as follows: 

,

,

1

1

c j c

c

c c

n

n T

?
?

??

? ?
?

? ?                                   (8) 

Thus, according to these topic related distributions, MB-LDA 

can conclude the several high probability topics as hot topics in 

microblogs and find out the most representative words for each 

topic. Besides content mining, with the contactor-topics 

distribution, MB-LDA can dig out interesting topics focused by 

each contactor. 

In summary, MB-LDA can discover not only the topics of 

microblogs, but also the topics focused by contactors. With the 

result of topic mining, we can conduct several personalized 

analysis and applications on microblogs, such as similar 

microblog detection, microblog recommendation, and social circle 

recommendation. 

3.3 Extension 
The idea of the model can be not only applied to topic mining 

for microblogs, but also extended to many text data with social 

links, e.g., Email. The reply relationship in Email is an analogy to 

the forwarding relationship (RT) in microblog while the To list 

and Cc list in Email are similar to the contactor (@) in microblog. 

Other application scenarios such as chat history mining, forum 

posts mining can also learn from MB-LDA model. 

4. DISTRIBUTED MB-LDA 
Distributed MB-LDA is proposed to handle the real world 

application with large scale microblogs when MB-LDA on single 

node becomes less practical within limited computing and storage 

resources. Distributed MB-LDA is developed in the framework of 

MapReduce, which is a software framework introduced by 

Google to support distributed computing on large data sets on 

clusters of computers. 

4.1 MapReduce overview 
   MapReduce is a framework for processing huge datasets with 

distributed Map and Reduction operations (Fig. 4). In Map step, 

the master node splits input data into partitions, which can be 

processed by user-defined Map functions, and produces (key, 

value) tuples as intermediate output. In Reduce step, the Reduce 

functions merge all intermediate tuples with the same key, sort 

them and output the final (key, value) tuples. Both the map 

function and reduce function can be executed in parallel on non-

overlapping input and intermediate data. 

Input data

Map function

Map function

Map function

Input split

Reduce 

function

Reduce 

function

Shuffle

...

...

Output

Output

...

 Fig. 4 MapReduce framework 

 

4.2 Solution 
In MapReduce framework, microblogs must be split into 

partitions. Under the situation of real world application, the 

number of microblogs is huge (over millions) as well as the 

number of contactors, while the totally number of words is 

relatively small (about 20 thousand). Equation (5) implies that 

only a global variable       is used in sampling. Through this 
analysis on the inference process of MB-LDA, we find out if 

microblogs data are split by contactor, document-topic count 

matrix and contactor-topic count matrix can be stored locally 

WWW 2012 – LSNA'12 Workshop April 16–20, 2012, Lyon, France

1038



while word-topic count matrix must be stored globally because 

only word-topic count matrix needs global updates. As mentioned 

above, the word-topic count matrix is not space consuming so it 

can be stored in memory; and for document-topic count matrix 

and contactor-topic count matrix, they are so huge to restrict a 

single node computation, so they are stored in HDFS and can be 

accessed by row key. In each Gibbs sampling iteration, each 

processor unit p samples its local topic assignment zp from the 

posterior distribution of Equation (5) in parallel, and then updates 

local stored matrices as well as global stored matrix according to 

the new topic assignments. 

 

Global count 

matrix

Input

split

Map 

function
Load

Load

Reduce function

Update globally

Local count 

matrix

Load

Update locally

 Fig. 5 Sampling iteration in distributed MB-LDA 

 

We model each Gibbs sampling iteration of distributed MB-

LDA as a MapReduce job, as illustrated in Figure 5, where the 

Map step conducts Gibbs sampling in parallel and the Reduce step 

updates the global count matrix incrementally for next iteration. 

The working process of distributed MB-LDA is depicted in Figure 

6. 

After enough iterations, the model reaches the convergence and 

calculates out the final count matrices. With these count matrices, 

we can obtain the related distributions by Equation (6-8), which 

are useful in topic mining for microblogs. 

In MapReduce environment with a cluster’s resource, the 
mappers mainly conduct the sampling process in parallel and the 

reducers mainly update the count matrices for next iteration, 

which makes distributed MB-LDA effective and scalable in topic 

mining for large scale microblogs. 

4.3 Optimization 
In order to accelerate the running time of distributed MB-LDA 

on MapReduce, we apply a performance model to further 

optimize our approach. This performance model[25] is designed for 

time optimization in MapReduce framework through a task 

pipeline by tuning the number of mappers and reducers.  

The model concludes under the situation that the system 

capacity is M mappers and R reducers; each mapper has a constant 

overhead C1; each reducer has a constant overhead C2; network 

transfer rate is Vn; the size of intermediate data is S', the best 

scheduling plan is to set X mappers and Y reducers where 

   ?
  

  
 

  

     
 and    . According to this scheduling plan, 

we can further accelerate the overall running time of distributed 

MB-LDA. 

5. EXPERIMENTS 

5.1 Experiment setup 

5.1.1 Dataset 
In this paper, we use a microblog dataset, original from Twitter, 

to examine the performance of MB-LDA and distributed MB-

LDA. This dataset collected 3844612 microblogs sent by 115886 

users from Sept. 2009 to Jan. 2010. We prepared a medium 

microblog set (100 thousand tweets) for effectiveness experiment 

and a large microblog set (1 million tweets) for efficiency 

experiment. 

5.1.2 Data preprocessing 
In order to save space or to speed up sampling, the punctuation 

and stop words (function words, such as the, is, at) in original 

microblog dataset must be removed before experiments, which 

appear with high frequency but cannot help topic mining for 

microblogs. We finished this preprocessing work by using a 

punctuation list and a stop words dictionary. 

5.1.3 Experiment environment 
The experiments were conducted on a cluster of 12 nodes 

(Master node: RAM 8G; CPU Intel Core 2 Duo 3.00GHz, Hard 

Disk 160G 7200RPM; Slave node: RAM 4G; CPU Intel Pentium 

4 3.00GHz; Hard Disk 1.5T 7200RPM; Switch bandwidth: 1G), 

with Operating System of Ubuntu Linux 9.10 and Hadoop 0.20.2 

as MapReduce implementation. 

5.2 Effectiveness experiment 
Effectiveness experiment was conducted on medium dataset 

mainly to examine the performance of MB-LDA. The 

hyperparameters setup refers to [12], where         
 ,        ,     . Set     by default to indicate the 
comment part and original part in retweet microblogs share the 

same topics. 

Initialization  

Split microblog data into partitions  

Randomly initialize the count matrices 

 

Map step 

for each processor unit p in parallel do 

 Load global word-topic count matrix to local 

 Parse key to the specific microblog 

 Parse value to all words in the specific microblog 

 Load local document-topic count matrix 

 Load local contactor-topic count matrix 

 Sample zp locally via MB-LDA inference 

 Update local count matrices 

end for 

 

Reduce step 

Update global word-topic count matrix 

 

Fig. 6 Process of distributed MB-LDA 

WWW 2012 – LSNA'12 Workshop April 16–20, 2012, Lyon, France

1039



5.2.1 Performance  
The overall result of MB-LDA is showed in Fig. 8, where the 

first six topics are listed out of total 50 topics. Topics are 

represented by key words, so we can find out that Topic 1 is about 

business topics; Topic 2 is about Apple's product topics; Topic 3 is 

about the event of time; Topic 4 is about microblog related topics; 

Topic 5 is about the event of dining or eating; Topic 6 is about 

multimedia topics. The key words of each topic are accurate to 

recognize and these topics are independent with each other. Fig. 8 

also shows the corresponding microblogs of Topic 2 and Topic 6, 

which are really reasonable in topic assignments. (E.g. the fourth 

microblog is assigned to Topic 2 through document relevance 

relation) 

Besides content mining of microblogs, MB-LDA also discovers 

the topics focused by contactors.  According to contactor 

relevance relation, Fig. 7 shows that Ethan (pseudonym for 

privacy) pays close attention to Topic 1, Topic 4 and Topic 6. The 

corresponding microblogs with Ethan really fall into these topics. 

@Ethan: one individual can have as much 

impact in social network as a large company 

(CNN)

@Ethan: business profitable from 1styear. All 

self funded, may raise more money 2 expand. 

30 employees in film tv & digital 

#brainstormtech

@Ethan: I have 3 million followers because 

I'm Famous. Hollywood needs to embrace and 

monitize the web.

@Ethan: Twitter is the closest the web has 

become to televison because of immediacy 

#brainstormtech

@Ethan: I'm watching butterfly effect that's 

such a cool movie man!!

Topic 1

Topic 4

Topic 6

@Ethan

 Fig. 7 Example of contactor-topic relation 

Topics discovered by MB-LDA

Topic 1

Social

Business

Marketing

Internet

Tips

Topic 2

Iphone

App

Store

Web

Apple

Topic 3

Today

Friday

Tomorrow

Week

Going

Topic 4

Twitter

Follower

Learn

Tweet

White

Topic 5

Dinner

Lunch

Eat

Wine

Chicken

Topic 6

Video

Music

Watch

Chat

Youtube

…(total 50 topics)

iPhone App Reviews: Ice Age: Dawn of the 

Dinosaurs A Remarkable Movie Tie-In Game: 

http://bit.ly/7QQ2GN

Ramp Champ for iPhone / iPod touch 

downloads for free:  Today only, the iTunes 

App Store offers downloads of Ramp C...

Trivial Pursuit for iPhone downloads for $2:  

Today only, the iTunes App Store offers 

downloads of Trivial Pursuit ..

SmartMoney's deal expert's latest conquest: 

RT @kellibgrant: just got a Nike + iPod chip 

($30) and armband ($20) @BestBuy for $0.91.

Black Beauty Live > Adrianne is currently 

Live Free Chat: Adrianne gets a huge thrill out 

of flashing strangers on the W http://url4.eu/

mG9f

I uploaded a YouTube video -- studio update 

http://bit.ly/gLBOd

RT @skilletmusic Don't forget to tune in today 

at 3p PST / 6p EST to chat with Skillet live.... 

http://bit.ly/eCvea

TUNE IN TODAY @ 4:20pm PST FOR A 

LIVE VIDEO CHAT WITH Daddy X Live 

from the mountain studio!! http://bit.ly/

8XWLeV RT @kottonmouth

Corresponding microblogs

…

…

 

Fig. 8 Topic mining overall result of MB-LDA 

 

WWW 2012 – LSNA'12 Workshop April 16–20, 2012, Lyon, France

1040



5.2.2 Comparative experiment 
We also conducted the comparative experiment between MB-

LDA and LDA, which is a baseline model in the field of topic 

modeling. The metric Perplexity is a standard measure of 

performance for statistical models, which indicates the uncertainty 

in predicting a single word; the model with lower value is better in 

performance. Perplexity is defined as follows: 

log ( )
( ) exp

mm

mm

p w
Perplexity W

N

? ?? ?
? ?? ?

? ?? ?

?
?    (9) 

where W is a test set with m documents, wm and Nm indicate the 

observed words and number of words in the test document 

respectively.  

Perplexity is used to measure the performance of LDA and 

MB-LDA under the same hyperparameters setup, and the result is 

showed in Fig. 9: 

0 100 200 300

6000

6500

7000

P
er

pl
ex

ity

Iterations

 LDA

 MB-LDA

 

Fig. 9 Perplexity of LDA and MB-LDA 

Fig. 9 shows that perplexity of MB-LDA is always lower until 

they reach the convergence after enough iterations, and confirms 

that MB-LDA outperforms the baseline of LDA with the help of 

structured information in microblog itself. 

5.3 Efficiency experiment 
Efficiency experiment was conducted on large dataset to 

examine the scalability of distributed MB-LDA. When faced large 

scale date, MB-LDA on single node becomes less practical or 

even can’t conduct calculation within limited resources. At that 
time, distributed MB-LDA offers a solution to handle large scale 

microblogs. 

We measured and compared the speedup of distributed MB-

LDA with default setup and with optimized setup to verify the 

scalability using the large microblog set. Because MB-LDA on 

single node fails with “out of memory” error, we used 3 nodes as 
the baseline to measure the speedup of 3/6/9/12 nodes in the 

efficiency experiment. To quantify speedup, we made an 

assumption that the speedup of using 3 nodes is 3 compared to 

using one node. 

In our cluster environment, parameters are listed as follows: 

M=12, R=12 (each slave node with 1 mapper and 1 reducer), 

Vn=10.8M/s, C1=3.3s, C2=3.2s and S'?6600M. Under these 
parameters configuration, we can calculate out the optimized 

setup for X mappers and Y reducers, compared with default setup 

(M mappers and one reducer). The speedup of using different 

nodes is showed in Fig. 10. 

2 4 6 8 10 12

2

4

6

8

10

12

S
pe

ed
 u

p

Nodes

 default setup

 optimized setup

 perfect

 

Fig. 10 Speedup of distributed MB-LDA 

Fig. 10 shows that distributed MB-LDA can achieve increasing 

speedup when more nodes are added into the system, although 

there lies a gap between perfect linear speedup (dash line) and 

distributed MB-LDA speedup, which is expected due to the 

increase time spending in network communication over the cluster. 

Besides, Fig. 10 shows distributed MB-LDA with optimized setup 

achieves higher speedup than that with default setup, and confirms 

that the optimization can improve the overall performance. From 

the view of time (see Table 1), the optimization can reduce the 

execution time by about 10~15%. 

Table 1 Average execution time per iteration 

Nodes Default setup Optimized setup Time saving 

3 137mins 126mins 8.0% 

6 80mins 67mins 16.2% 

9 52mins 47mins 9.6% 

12 42mins 36mins 14.3% 

Furthermore, we analyzed the relationship between sampling time 

and total map time. We figure out sampling time takes up 86.2% 

of total map time by average. The remaining time is spent on I/O 

transfer and network communication. Effort on reducing this time 

can further improve the efficiency of distributed MB-LDA. 

13.8%

86.2%

 Sampling time

 Remaining time

 

 

 

Fig. 11 Time distribution graph of Map step 

WWW 2012 – LSNA'12 Workshop April 16–20, 2012, Lyon, France

1041



6. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we introduced MB-LDA for topic mining in 

microblogs and proposed distributed MB-LDA to handle the 

situation of large scale microblogs. Experimental results show that 

MB-LDA exhibits good performance and distributed MB-LDA 

scales well on actual dataset. 

In future work, the automatic learning of hyperparameters in 

MB-LDA can be conducted to achieve a better performance in 

various application scenarios. Besides, we plan to use distributed 

cache to reduce the time spent on I/O transfer and speed up the 

execution time of distributed MB-LDA. Other strategies or 

implementations to reduce network communication should be also 

considered. 

7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The work is supported by Ministry of Industry and Information 

Technology of China (No. 2010ZX01042-002-003-001) 

8. REFERENCES 
[1]   J. H. Kang, K. Lerman, A. Plangprasopchok. Analyzing 

Microblogs with Affinity Propagation. In Proceedings of the 

1st KDD workshop on Social Media Analytic, 2010: 67-70 

[2]   A. Java, X. Song, T. Finin, et al. Why we Twitter: 
Understanding Microblogging Usage and Communities. In 

Proceedings of the 9th WebKDD and 1st SNA-KDD 2007 

workshop on Web mining and social network analysis 

(WebKDD/SNA-KDD) 2007:56-65 

[3]   B. Krishnamurthy, P. Gill, M. Arlitt. A few chirps about 
Twitter. In Proceedings of the first workshop on online social 

networks (WOSP), 2008:19-24 

[4]   D. Ramage, S. Dumais, D. Liebling. Characterizing 
microblogs with topic models. In Proceedings of International 

AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, 2010: 130-

137 

[5]   J. Dean, S. Ghemawat. MapReduce: simplified data 
processing on large clusters. Commun. 2008, 51(1): 107-113 

[6]   R. Xu, D. Wunsch. Survey of clustering algorithms. IEEE 
Transactions on Neural Networks, 2005, 16(3): 645–678  

[7]   S. Deerwester, S. Dumais, T. Landauer, et al. Indexing by 
latent semantic analysis. Journal of the American Society of 

Information Science, 1990, 41(6): 391–407 

[8]   G. Salton, M. McGill. Introduction to Modern Information 
Retrieval. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1983 

[9]   T. K. Landauer, P. W. Foltz, D. Laham. Introduction to Latent 
Semantic Analysis. Discourse Processes, 1998, 25: 259-284  

[10]   D. M. Blei, A. Y. Ng, M. I. Jordan. Latent dirichlet allocation. 
The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2003, 3: 993–
1022 

[11]   T. Hofmann. Probabilistic latent semantic indexing. In 
Proceedings of the 22nd annual International ACM SIGIR 

Conference on Research and development in information 

retrieval, 1999: 50-57 

[12]   T. Grif?ths, M. Steyvers. Probabilistic topic models. Latent 
Semantic Analysis: A Road to Meaning. Hillsdale, NJ: 

Laurence Erlbaum, 2006 

[13]   X. Wei and W. B. Croft. LDA-based document models for ad 
hoc retrieval. In Proceedings of the 29th annual International 

ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and development in 

information retrieval, 2006: 178-185 

[14]   L. Dietz, S. Bickel, T. Scheffer. Unsupervised prediction of 
citation in?uences. In Proceedings of the 24th International 
Conference on Machine learning, 2007: 233-240 

[15]   QiaoZhu Mei, Deng Cai, Duo Zhang, et al. Topic Modeling 
with Network Regularization. In Proceedings of the 17th 

International Conference on World Wide Web. 2008 

[16]   D. M. Blei, J. Lafferty. Topic models. Text Mining: 
Classification, Clustering, and Applications. New York: 

Chapman & Hall/CRC, 2009 

[17]   R. Nallapati, W. Cohen. Link-pLSA-LDA: A new 
unsupervised model for topics and in?uence of blogs. In 
Proceedings of the International Conference on Weblogs and 

Social Media (ICWSM), 2008 

[18]   Congkai Sun, Bin Gao, Zhenfu Cao, et al. HTM: A topic 
model for hypertexts. In Proceedings of the 2008 Conference 

on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2008: 

514-522 

[19]   D. Newman, A. Asuncion, P. Smyth, et al. Distributed 
Algorithms for Topic Models. Journal of Machine Learning 

Research. 2009, 1801-1828. 

[20]   A. Asuncion, P. Smyth, M. Welling. Asynchronous 
distributed learning of topic models. In Proceedings of the 

20th Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS). 2008 

[21]   Yi Wang, Hongjie Bai, M. Stanton, et al. PLDA: Parallel 
Latent Dirichlet Allocation for Large-Scale Applications. In 

Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on 

Algorithmic Aspects in Information and Management (AAIM 

'09), 2009, 301-314. 

[22]   A. Smola, S. Narayanamurthy. An architecture for parallel 
topic models. Proceedings of VLDB Endow.2010, 3, 1-2, 703-

710. 

[23]   T. L. Griffiths, M. Steyvers. Finding scientific topics. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 

United States of America, 2004, 101:5228–5235,  

[24]   T. P. Minka, J. Lafferty. Expectation-propagation for the 
generative aspect model. In Proceedings of the 18th 

Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 2002: 

352-359 

[25]   Xiao Yang, Jianling Sun. An Analytical Performance Model  
of MapReduce. In Proceedings of CCIS: 306 – 310, 2011.

 

WWW 2012 – LSNA'12 Workshop April 16–20, 2012, Lyon, France

1042


	1. INTRODUCTION
	2. RELATED WORK
	3. MicroBlog Latent Dirichlet Allocation
	3.1 Modeling
	3.2 Inference
	3.3 Extension

	4. DISTRIBUTED MB-LDA
	4.1 MapReduce overview
	4.2 Solution
	4.3 Optimization

	5. EXPERIMENTS
	5.1 Experiment setup
	5.1.1 Dataset
	5.1.2 Data preprocessing
	5.1.3 Experiment environment

	5.2 Effectiveness experiment
	5.2.1 Performance
	5.2.2 Comparative experiment

	5.3 Efficiency experiment

	6. CONCLUSION
	7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
	8. REFERENCES

