
Efficiently finding optimal winding-
constrained loops in the plane
Paul Vernaza, Venkatraman Narayanan, and Maxim Likhachev

pvernaza@cs.cmu.edu, venkatrn@andrew.cmu.edu, maxim@cs.cmu.edu

The Robotics Institute
Carnegie Mellon University

Pittsburgh, PA 19104

Abstract—We present a method to efficiently find winding-
constrained loops in the plane that are optimal with respect
to a minimum-cost objective and in the presence of obstacles.
Our approach is similar to a typical graph-based search for an
optimal path in the plane, but with an additional state variable
that encodes information about path homotopy. Upon finding a
loop, the value of this state corresponds to a line integral over
the loop that indicates how many times it winds around each
obstacle, enabling us to reduce the problem of finding paths
satisfying winding constraints to that of searching for paths to
suitable states in this augmented state space. We give an intuitive
interpretation of the method based on fluid mechanics and show
how this yields a way to perform the necessary calculations
efficiently. Results are given in which we use our method to
find optimal routes for autonomous surveillance and intruder
containment.

I. INTRODUCTION

The subject of this work is finding optimal constrained loops
in the plane. More specifically, out of all paths starting and
ending at a specific location in the plane and satisfying certain
winding constraints, we would like to find one such path that
minimizes a given location-dependent cost accumulated along
the path, while also avoiding some regions entirely.

Figure 1 depicts a practical situation in which this type of
problem arises. Here, an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) is
tasked with flying a surveillance mission to photograph certain
regions of interest (ROI) located within hostile territory. The
UAV must find a route that begins and ends at its home base.
It must additionally fly a route that minimizes a given cost
functional, determined by distance traveled and proximity to
hostile radar installations, while entirely avoiding certain high-
traffic regions deemed too risky to traverse. Of prime concern
is the need to photograph the ROI from all perspectives.
Formally, we can ensure this by requiring that the generated
path satisfy topological winding constraints with respect to the
ROI—if the UAV winds at least once around each ROI, it will
be able to view each ROI from every angle.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. First, we give
an intuitive description of our approach, followed by a brief
discussion of the relation of our work to other methods. An in-
depth description of technical details of our method follows
in Section IV. Experimental results are given in Section V,
followed by discussion.

Fig. 1: An optimal plan (solid line) for a hypothetical UAV
surveillance mission. The UAV is constrained to take off and
return to a particular location, winding twice around each of
three regions of interest. Regions of interest are designated by
polygonal dashed lines. Red, striped polygons denote high-
traffic regions that the UAV must avoid. Circular dashed lines
denote location and ranges of radar installations, with radar
power decreasing with distance to center.

II. METHOD OVERVIEW

The basic idea of our method is very simple and best
motivated by a fluid analogy. Suppose we wish to find a planar
loop that encloses some set of regions. We imagine that within
each region is a source that produces fluid at a certain rate. By
the divergence theorem (illustrated in Fig. 2), we know that
the net rate at which fluid escapes any loop is equal to the
rate at which it is produced by sources enclosed by the loop.
Therefore, we can find a loop enclosing the desired regions
by searching for a loop through which fluid escapes at a rate
equal to the sum of the rates assigned to those regions. So
long as there are no two sets of regions whose rates sum to
the same quantity, we can be assured that any such loop must
contain only the desired regions.

We can find such a loop via a straightforward modification
of any standard graph-based method for navigation in the



1
3
0

5

net out?o
w

 = 4

net out?ow = 0

net
 out?ow = 1

net out?ow = 10 (both loops)

Fig. 2: Illustration of divergence theorem: total flow rate
exiting the boundary of any region is equal to the sum
of source flow rates contained within, even in the presence
of other sources. Locations of flow sources are indicated
by faucet icons, with their flow rates indicated by numbers
adjacent to these icons.

plane. This is accomplished by treating the rate at which fluid
passes through a path as a dependent variable whose state
is tracked along with the usual state necessary for navigation,
such as position and orientation. Any given state of the vehicle
can therefore be associated with any number of different flow
values, depending on how the search reached that state. When
the search visits the goal configuration, we can check the flow
value to verify whether the desired regions were enclosed;
if they have been, then we are assured that the loop thus
found is optimal with respect to all other loops satisfying
our constraints, as long as the search algorithm employed is
admissible.

A. Example with one region

Fig. 3 gives a simple illustration of how our method might
proceed given just one region of interest around which to loop.
Specifically, we consider the problem of finding an optimal
path that begins at the flow-augmented state ((x, y), F ) =
(A, 0) and winds around the obstacle one or more times before
returning to the location A. We will refer to the flow state F
as the F -value.

The figure shows a number of possible actions that the
search could take, for illustrative purposes. Each arc is marked
by the quantity by which the F -value is incremented traversing
the arc in the direction shown, given that the region of interest

-1/4

+1/4-1/4

+1
/2

+1/2
-1/

2

-1/2

region of
interest

F= 0

1/2

+1/4

1, 5/4, 3/4

CB

D E F

A

1

Fig. 3: Illustration of homotopy-augmented search. Shown is a
2x2 grid on which a graph search is performed, with a single
obstacle in the center. Graph search begins at point A (marked
F = 0). Directed edges are marked with signed F -value
increments (in italics). Other values denote F -values at grid
vertices associated with one or more paths discovered during
search. Solid lines show paths found passing the obstacle to the
left, while dashed lines show paths found passing the obstacle
to the right

contains a source of rate one. Each location is marked by
the F -values found at those locations by exploring different
illustrated paths. For instance, the search begins by expanding
A, generating B with F = 1/2, and generating C with
F = ?1/2. Next, the search expands B, generating D with
F = 3/4 and E with F = 1, followed by a similar expansion
of C.

At this point, we note that E has been reached via two (non-
homotopic) paths, each yielding a distinct F -value. Therefore,
we next expand the location E twice—once for the state (E, 1)
and once for the state (E,?1). If we continue this process,
the reader may verify that we will eventually expand the state
(A, 2) and/or (A,?2), though this is not explicitly illustrated
for purposes of clarity. Note that this will require traversing
arcs in directions contrary to those illustrated, in which case
the arc’s F value is negated before adding it to the state’s
F -value.

Upon expanding the state (A, 2), it is apparent that the
search has found a path winding clockwise around the obstacle
exactly once. Furthermore, it may be verified that any other
path that winds once, clockwise, around the obstacle, also has
F = 2. However, if we expand the states in an admissible
ordering, such as that provided by A* [10], we are guaranteed
that the first path via which we have expanded (A, 2), is the
optimal one to that state. Since all paths starting at A, winding
clockwise, once, around the obstacle, arrive at (A, 2), we can
in that case conclude that this path is one that achieves the



minimum cost out of all such paths.
We finally observe that any loop winding around the ob-

stacle k times arrives at the state (A,±2k) for k > 0, with
sign determined by the winding direction. If the loop does not
wind around the obstacle, however, the path arrives at the state
(A, 0). The converse statements are also true.

B. Winding around multiple regions

In the case that there are multiple regions of interest, we
proceed as previously mentioned, placing a fluid source inside
each region and computing F -values via superposition. We
may then specify how many times the path should wind around
each region, where winding is defined in the topological
sense [11]. Assuming we assign to each region a fluid source
of rate log zi, where zi is the ith prime number, a loop
satisfying the winding constraints may be found by searching
for a path to a state with

expF = ?iz
Wi
i , (1)

where Wi is the winding number associated with the ith
region. The fundamental theorem of arithmetic implies that
this constitutes an invertible map between winding numbers
and F -values.

III. RELATED WORK

Our work was inspired by the work of Bhattacharya et.
al. [3, 4], who first proposed the general idea described in
Section II of performing graph search for navigation with a
state vector augmented by homotopy information. Our work
differs principally in two ways. First, we derive a version of
homotopy-augmented graph search that is suitable for finding
optimal loops with arbitrary winding constraints. Furthermore,
we employ a real-valued encoding of homotopy information,
as opposed to the complex-valued encoding derived in [3].

Although it is not the focus of this work, we note that the
real-valued encoding of homotopy information derived here
may also be applied to the problem described in [3], which
might be characterized as point-to-point planning in 2D with
homology constraints on the generated paths. In addition to
having an intuitive interpretation in terms of fluids, applying
the encoding we derive here would yield a method arguably
simpler to implement.

Also noteworthy is recent work in computer vision that
employs planning with winding angles in order to perform
tracking with occlusion [9]. Planning in this way is essentially
equivalent to the method described here, a fact that we show
formally in Sec. IV-C. Additionally, we give an intuitive
fluid-based interpretation of the method, derive an appropriate
heuristic, and apply the method to surveillance and optimal
confinement problems.

The problem of loop planning discussed here also bears
some similarity to several problems in computational geom-
etry. In the geometric knapsack problem [1], the objective is
to find a simple loop enclosing discrete reward locations of
varying reward, such that the enclosed reward minus the length
of the loop, is maximized. Arkin et al. [1] give algorithms to

solve certain variants of this problem in time polynomial in the
number of vertices of the polygons given as input. Our method
is similar if the reward regions are thought of as regions around
which the path should wind at least once. However, our method
appears to be more flexible in a variety of ways, due to our use
of graph-based search. We need not assume the environment
is polygonal, nor do we assume the cost of the path is uniform
across free space, or that the vehicle dynamics are trivial, as
in [1]. Moreover, we can leverage problem-specific heuristics
in the context of A* in order to accelerate the search. A final
difference between our work and that of [1] is that we are able
to find solutions with arbitrary winding constraints.

As surveillance constitutes a principal application of our
method, our method is related to another problem from com-
putational geometry knows as the optimum watchman route
problem. This problem, defined as that of generating a path of
minimum length through an environment such that every point
in the environment is visible from some point along the path,
was proved NP-hard by Chin and Ntafos [8]. We motivate
the UAV surveillance problem considered here from an aim
of rendering each point along the ROI visible, but the nature
of our solutions is such that this would be guaranteed only in
certain cases, such as the case where ROI are flat enough to
guarantee that no ROI occludes any other, or the case where
the ROI are spaced sufficiently such that winding twice around
each ROI is sufficient to guarantee full visibiity. Therefore, it
is unlikely that optimum watchman routes are equivalent to
optimum winding-constrained loops.

UAV planning in itself has been the focus of a significant
amount of work in engineering disciplines. Typical goals of
these approaches include cooperative planning, enforcing non-
holonomic constraints, and planning in real-time [6, 5, 2].
Other work focuses on ensuring geometric visibility in urban
environments [7]. However, it appears that comparatively little
work has focused on planning optimal loop paths for UAVs.
An exception is the work of [12], who devised a suboptimal
algorithm to find looping paths visiting a number of ROI while
satisfying path curvature constraints. This method is again
less flexible than ours in that we allow an arbitrary spatially-
dependent cost function to take into account factors such as
spatially-varying risk.

IV. TECHNICAL DETAILS

We now clarify some of the technical points of the method
presented in Sec. II.

A. Graph construction

An informal description of our graph construction was given
in Section II. That description may be formalized in the
following way. First, we assume we are given a description of
the graph corresponding to a point-to-point navigation problem
in the plane, consisting of a state space X and a successor
function succ : X ? 2X , where 2X is the power set of X .
Typical examples of X include X = R2 and X = R2×S1, the
latter corresponding to navigation with heading dependence.



We then define a new state space X ? = X×R, with elements
denoted by (x, f). Let ? : X × X ? (I ? R2) denote the
function that generates the Cartesian path taken from a node
in the original graph to a successor. succ? is then defined in
the following way:

succ? : (x, f) 7? {(x?, f ?) | x? ? succ(x), f ? = f+F (?(x, x?))},
where F : (I ? R2) ? R is a line integral that will be
defined formally in the next section.

The start state for graph search is defined by (x0, 0), where
x0 is the start state in the pre-augmented graph. The goal
state is defined as (x0,

?
iWi log zi), where Wi is the desired

winding number of the solution path around the ith region.

B. Line integral construction
Aspects of the line integral referred to in the last section

are now detailed. First, we note that a suitable flow field is
given by

V (x) =
?
i

ri
2pi

x? oi
?x? oi?2 , (2)

where oi ? R2 is an arbitrary source location inside the ith
region for which we are given a winding constraint, and ri =
log zi is the source rate assigned to the ith source. This may
be established by considering, for example, the case where oi
is located at the center of a circle and devising an integrand
that will integrate to ri. Denoting by nˆ(s) the normal to x˜ at
s, we define

F (x˜) =

?
V (x˜(s)) · nˆ(s) ds. (3)

In order to compute the value by which F increments along
an edge, we must evaluate this integral with respect to the path
taken by the edge. Assuming this path is a straight line, the
integral can be computed analytically. The integral is simpli-
fied considerably by taking into consideration its rotational,
translational, and scaling invariances, as depicted in Fig. 4.
By further applying linearity, we may therefore reduce the
general case to the line integral of V over (0, 0)? (0, 1) due
to a single obstacle of rate r located at position o = (ox, oy).
Assuming the segment normal is given by nˆ =

(?1 0) the
absolute value of the line integral is in this case given by? 1

s=0

V (x) · nˆ ds = r
2pi

? 1
y=0

? ?ox
o2x + (y ? oy)2

dy (4)

=
r

2pi

(
arctan

1? oy
ox

? arctan ?oy
ox

)
, (5)

which is equal to r?/(2pi), with ? as defined in Fig. 4. The
general case may then be derived via similar triangles and
superposition. For a line segment with generic endpoints p0
and p1, this yields

F =
?
i

si
ri
2pi

arccos

?
p1 ? oi
?p1 ? oi? ,

p0 ? oi
?p0 ? oi?

?
, (6)

where the sign si ? {?1, 1} is determined by whether oi falls
on the left or right side of the directed segment p0 ? p1,
according to the desired convention.

rotate
+translate

sca
le

Fig. 4: Illustration of symmetries in line integration of flow
field: the flux through the segment L due to o? is equal to the
flux through the segment (0, 0)? (0, 1) due to o.

C. Equivalence with winding-vector approach

Summing Equation (6) along a path reveals the F -value
to be a linear projection of the vector of winding angles
associated with the path around each region; i.e., F = ?w, ??,
where ? is a vector of winding angles, and w is a vector
with wi = log zi/(2pi). The correctness of Eq. (1) follows
immediately from this observation. This raises the question of
whether an equivalent method may be obtained by augmenting
the state vector with a vector of winding angles as opposed
to the single F -value. Here we show that the two methods
are indeed equivalent, in the sense that the entire vector of
winding angles can be uniquely recovered from any F -value.

The key observation is that each valid winding angle at
each location in the plane can be expressed in the form ?i =
?¯i + 2piki, where ki ? Z and ?¯i is a location-dependent offset
angle. We then observe that

expF = exp
?
i

log zi

(
ki +

1

2pi
?¯i

)
, (7)

which implies that

exp

(
F ?

?
i

log zi
2pi

?¯i

)
= ?iz

ki
i . (8)

Therefore, given F , the winding angles ?i can be obtained by
finding the prime factors of the left-hand side of the previous
expression.

An interesting geometric interpretation of this fact is that
at each location, the winding angles are determined by the
intersection of the hyperplane F = ?w, ?? and the discrete,
infinite lattice of valid winding angles. The slopes of this
hyperplane are ratios of logs of prime numbers, and are
therefore irrational; consequently, the hyperplane can intersect
the infinite lattice in at most one location. This is illustrated
in Fig. 5.

A practical consequence of this analysis concerns the mem-
ory efficiency of the method. Given many winding constraints,
it is clearly inefficient to take the naive approach of storing



Fig. 5: Illustration of invertibility of map from winding angles
to F -values for an example with two regions of interest.
The set of valid winding angles (?1, ?2) consists of the set
of lattice points (intersections of gray lines). The only valid
pair of winding angles that also satisfies the F equation is
the unique intersection of the pictured line with the lattice
(circled). The uniqueness of the intersection point follows from
the irrationality of the slope ? log 2/ log 3.

each winding angle as an individual floating-point value,
since the set of valid winding angles for each location is a
discrete set. Storing a single F -value as a floating-point value
constitutes a memory-efficient alternative to this approach.
Alternatively, one may store a single floating-point offset angle
vector ?¯ per location in addition to a vector of integer ki per
state; for any reasonable problem, only a few bits per state
would be necessary to represent each ki.

D. Search heuristic

The combinatorial nature of winding constraints necessitates
a careful choice of search strategy. For this reason, we employ
A* search with the heuristic illustrated in Fig. 6. Given a query
state for which the heuristic is to be computed, we calculate,
of the regions with winding constraints, which regions would
have their constraints satisfied if the loop were closed with a
straight line to the goal. For each of the remaining regions with
non-zero winding constraints, we compute the length of the
minimum-length path beginning at the query state, touching
the region, and returning to the goal location; this constitutes
the minimum-length excursion necessary to satisfy that re-
gion’s winding constraint. Of all the distances so computed,
we choose the greatest to be the value of the heuristic.

V. EXPERIMENTS

We implemented the method and applied it to several
test scenarios described here, with the aim of understanding
the qualitative characteristics of planning with winding con-
straints, the applicability of the method to realistic problems,
and the method’s computational efficiency. For simplicity, the
examples presented here only consider curves with positive
winding, though constraints with negative winding present no
obstacle to the method.

start
(goal)

query
state

Fig. 6: Illustration of heuristic. Query state indicates state for
which heuristic is to be evaluated. Solid line shows a path
that may have been taken to this state. Regions with positive
winding constraints are depicted as solid circles. Striped area
is an obstacle. Shaded area encloses regions whose winding
constraints would be satisfied if the loop were closed with a
straight line to the goal. Dashed line shows the maximum-
length excursion to reach any winding-constrained region not
in the shaded area. The value of the heuristic is the length of
the dashed line.

A. Synthetic environment

Fig. 7 shows the result of a simple synthetic experiment
showing optimal plans generated by our method winding
around three regions (referred henceforth as ROI) in varying
ways, and in the presence of obstacles. The purpose of this
experiment was to examine the qualitative aspects of paths
with different winding constraints.

In the simplest case, the path is constrained to wind around
each ROI exactly once. Since we simulated no vehicle dy-
namics in this experiment, the optimal solutions must always
be Jordan [11] in this case, as depicted. Paths constrained
to wind twice around some ROI tend to consist of a large
loop winding once around each obstacle with offshoots that
loop around each ROI once more. However, if any pair of
ROI are sufficiently close, the optimal path may contain a
Jordan subloop containing both, as depicted in the lower-right
portion of the figure. From an applications perspective, this
type of behavior may be desirable in the case of surveillance
with limited sensing range. In this case, it may be sufficient to
wind around groups of ROI (instead of winding around each
individually), provided that each group is contained within a
circle of radius smaller than the agent’s sensing range.

Note also that it is possible to specify a zero winding
number for certain ROI. In the case that all the windings
are either zero or one, the ROI with winding one must be
contained within the region enclosed by the loop (which must
be Jordan), while the ROI with winding zero must fall outside
the loop.

B. UAV surveillance

We now return to the UAV surveillance problem mentioned
in the introduction. For these experiments, we simulated hypo-
thetical UAV missions by annotating aerial imagery of military
bases with ROI, hypothetical radar installations, and regions
of excessive risk to be avoided entirely. Radar installations
were modeled as overlapping ellipses, each containing a cost



1 1

1

22
2

3 1

0

1 22

Fig. 7: Demonstration showing loops found by the method to
satisfy different winding constraints. Numbers indicate wind-
ing number constraints enforced for circular regions located
directly beneath. Obstacles depicted by rectangular regions.

attaining its maximum value at the center of the ellipse and di-
minishing gradually to zero at the boundary of the ellipse. Our
objective was to find minimum-cost loops subject to winding
constraints and entirely avoiding regions of excessive risk. We
approximated nontrivial dynamics for the vehicle by planning
for its orientation as well, limiting the maximum change in
orientation between straight segments to 22.5 degrees.

Figure 1 shows the result of finding an optimal path winding
around each ROI exactly twice. The optimal path in this case
has the previously discussed characteristic of having a large
outer loop with smaller loops branching off of it. It is observed
that the path generally stays just outside the region of radar
visibility, straying inside only briefly in order to wind around
the ROI. As expected, the path also never wanders inside the
forbidden regions.

Figure 8 shows a result obtained in another scenario. Again,
the path was constrained to wind twice around each ROI.
An interesting observation here is that upon visiting the last
ROI, the UAV has a choice of either winding around the ROI
and roughly retracing its path in the opposite direction, or
penetrating radar range briefly in order to return to its home
base. We observe that the optimal path indeed penetrates radar
range via a short path near the boundaries of two overlapping
radar installations before completing the loop.

C. Intruder confinement

We finally studied the application of our method to a
problem we will refer to as intruder confinement. This problem
consists of finding an optimal way to confine several intruders
in a maze-like environment, subject to the constraint that
innocent bystanders should not be confined. Confinement is
achieved by surrounding the intruders with a team of robots
that deploy from a central location. We assume that the robots
have limited communication range, such that we can define
a connectivity graph having an edge between two robots iff.
they are within communication range of each other. In order to
ensure that the robots can coordinate, this graph should remain
connected at all times.

A feasible deployment strategy may be obtained by finding
a loop that winds around each intruder exactly once without
winding around a bystander. Robots may then incrementally
deploy along the loop at intervals smaller than their commu-
nication radius in order to surround the intruders while main-
taining full connectivity and allowing bystanders to escape.

The results shown in Fig. 9 demonstrate that the method is
able to find optimal enclosures in highly irregular, maze-like
indoor environments of varying topologies. As was expected,
we observed that the complexity of planning did not scale
significantly with the complexity of the environment, allow-
ing us to solve problems such as those depicted. However,
the complexity was significantly affected by the number of
winding constraints imposed, as will be discussed shortly.

D. Computational efficiency

In order to study the computational efficiency of the method,
we applied it to a synthetic example where we varied just the
number of regions with winding constraints. The experimental
scenario is depicted in Fig. 10. In the nth trial, we used our
method to find a loop around the regions labeled 1, 2, . . . n,
winding once in the positive direction around each. This was
conducted both using the heuristic described in Sec. IV-D—
which we will refer to as the loop heuristic—and using the
Euclidean distance-to-goal heuristic.

Fig. 10b shows a clearly asymptotic exponential scaling
in the run time as a function of the number of winding
constraints for both heuristics. The loop heuristic, however,
exhibits a significantly more shallow slope in the log plot; for
10 constraints, the Euclidean distance heuristic is slower by
a factor of 10. An interesting observation is that the perfor-
mance of the loop heuristic was relatively insensitive to the
number of constraints up to about six, at which point planning
times increased significantly. For a very small number of
constraints, the Euclidean distance heuristic outperformed the
loop heuristic by a large margin, which we attribute to the
smaller overhead of the Euclidean heuristic.

The reason for the observed exponential scaling is that the
search ultimately begins to explore many different combina-
tions of windings around different obstacles. As we increase
the number of constraints, the number of plausible winding
states (and by extension, the open list) grows exponentially.
The loop heuristic was able to compensate for this effect
somewhat, but not completely. We also observed in experimens
with constraints winding multiple times around each region,
that the performance of the loop heuristic deteriorated. This is
to be expected, as it does not take into account the effect of
multiple windings.

We are currently investigating different avenues to enable
scaling to yet larger numbers of winding constraints. One
simple enhancement would be to prune the search when
winding angles become too large (a similar strategy was used
in [9]), at the expense of losing the completeness guarantee of
the search. Also, as noted in Section III, certain variants of the
geometric knapsack problem in computational geometry may



Fig. 8: Result of path planning for hypothetical UAV surveillance mission. UAV is constrained to wind exactly twice around
each ROI. Annotations are as described in Fig. 1.

?

(a)

?

(b)

Fig. 9: Results of intruder confinement experiments. Locations of intruders are marked by circles below exclamation symbols.
Locations of bystanders are marked by circles below question marks. Paths generated by the method are shown superimposed
on floor plan of environment. Robot deployments and sensing/communications ranges indicated by dashed circles.

be considered relaxations of the winding-constrained plan-
ning problem, and may be solved efficiently. An admissible
heuristic might therefore be obtained as the solution to such a
problem. Alternatively, it is possible to construct an admissible
heuristic as a graph search problem on a vastly reduced graph
that assumes a uniform cost function. We leave implementation
of these ideas as future work.

VI. CONCLUSION
We have demonstrated a method for efficiently finding

optimal loops in the plane subject to winding constraints.

The method accomplishes this by collapsing together all paths
sharing a common F -value, which encodes homotopy-type
information about the paths. The F -value is constructed in
such a way as to reversibly encode winding data when a
loop is completed, allowing us to reduce a search for cyclic,
winding-constrained paths to a search for an acyclic path to
a specific state encoding the desired winding. Computation of
the F -value additionally has an intuitive fluid-based interpre-
tation and may be performed efficiently. Finally, our method
leverages standard graph-based search methods to achieve



start/goal
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

(a) Experimental setup

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1010
?3

10 ?2
10 ?1
100
101
102
103

ru
n 

tim
e 

(s
)

number of winding constraints

Euc
lide

an 
heu

rist
ic

loop
 heu

ristic

(b) Run time scaling

Fig. 10: Synthetic experiment to determine empirical scaling of
computational complexity as a function of number of winding
constraints. Fig. 10a shows experimental setup with point
obstacles around which winding constraints were imposed,
along with order in which these constraints were introduced
and the solution path for 10 obstacles. Fig. 10b shows the time
to find the optimal solution versus the number of winding
constraints (note log scale), with and without the heuristic
described in Sec. IV-D (labeled loop heuristic).

flexibility in problem representation, vehicle dynamics, and
selection of domain-specific admissible heuristics to accelerate
the search process.

A particular challenge for the method as implemented up
to this point is the case where many winding constraints are
to be enforced. In the near-term, we anticipate that employing
straightforward heuristics (as described in Section V-D) will
greatly enhance the ability of the method to solve problems
of this type.

An additional area of future research is using our method
as a stepping stone to solving problems with constraints
related to, but stronger than winding. For instance, in the UAV
surveillance problem, we may wish to enforce the constraint
that the UAV fully observe one location before proceeding
to another. We are currently investigating how this type of
constraint might be enforced by augmenting the state vector
with state that keeps track of such ordering information.
Though the variations are endless, we believe that winding-
constrained planning yields fundamental insight that will prove
useful in a variety of related endeavors.

REFERENCES

[1] E.M. Arkin, S. Khuller, and J.S.B. Mitchell. Geo-
metric knapsack problems. Algorithmica, 10(5):399–
427, 1993. URL http://www.springerlink.com/content/
g007w81p153h3326/.

[2] J.S. Bellingham, M. Tillerson, M. Alighanbari, and J.P.
How. Cooperative path planning for multiple UAVs in

dynamic and uncertain environments. In IEEE Confer-
enece on Decision and Control, volume 3, dec. 2002.

[3] S. Bhattacharya, V. Kumar, and M. Likhachev. Search-
based path planning with homotopy class constraints.
In Third Annual Symposium on Combinatorial Search,
2010. URL http://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/AAAI/
AAAI10/paper/view/1920.

[4] Subhrajit Bhattacharya, Maxim Likhachev, and Vijay
Kumar. Identification and representation of homotopy
classes of trajectories for search-based path planning in
3d. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems,
27-30 June 2011. URL https://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.
php/SOCS/SOCS10/paper/view/2089/0.

[5] S.A. Bortoff. Path planning for UAVs. In American
Control Conference, volume 1, pages 364 –368 vol.1,
sep 2000. doi: 10.1109/ACC.2000.878915.

[6] P.R. Chandler, M. Pachter, and S. Rasmussen. UAV
cooperative control. In American Control Conference,
volume 1, pages 50 –55 vol.1, 2001. doi: 10.1109/ACC.
2001.945512.

[7] Peng Cheng, J. Keller, and V. Kumar. Time-optimal
UAV trajectory planning for 3d urban structure coverage.
In Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2008. IROS 2008.
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on, pages 2750 –
2757, sept. 2008. doi: 10.1109/IROS.2008.4650988.

[8] W Chin and S Ntafos. Optimum watchman routes.
In Proceedings of the second annual symposium on
Computational geometry, SCG ’86, pages 24–33, New
York, NY, USA, 1986. ACM. ISBN 0-89791-194-
6. doi: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/10515.10518. URL
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/10515.10518.

[9] H. Gong, J. Sim, M. Likhachev, and J. Shi. Multi-
hypothesis motion planning for visual object tracking.
In ICCV, 2011.

[10] P.E. Hart, N.J. Nilsson, and B. Raphael. A formal basis
for the heuristic determination of minimum cost paths.
Systems Science and Cybernetics, IEEE Transactions on,
4(2):100 –107, july 1968. ISSN 0536-1567. doi: 10.1109/
TSSC.1968.300136. URL http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpls/
abs all.jsp?arnumber=4082128.

[11] J.R. Munkres. Topology: a first course. Prentice Hall,
1975.

[12] Zhijun Tang and U. Ozguner. Motion planning for mul-
titarget surveillance with mobile sensor agents. Robotics,
IEEE Transactions on, 21(5):898 – 908, oct. 2005. ISSN
1552-3098. doi: 10.1109/TRO.2005.847567.











	Introduction
	Method Overview
	Example with one region
	Winding around multiple regions

	Related Work
	Technical Details
	Graph construction
	Line integral construction
	Equivalence with winding-vector approach
	Search heuristic

	Experiments
	Synthetic environment
	UAV surveillance
	Intruder confinement
	Computational efficiency

	Conclusion

